.. _userGuide:

##########
User Guide
##########

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 1

   inputFile

Command Line Interface
======================

The PQAnalysis package does not only provide an API but also a number of different command line tools. These tools can be categorized into two groups primary groups: pure command line tools and tools that are based on an input file. 

Input file based tools
----------------------

For more details on the grammar and syntax of the input file see :ref:`inputFile`.

- :ref:`rdf<cli.rdf>`
- :ref:`adf<cli.adf>`
- :ref:`msd<cli.msd>`
- :ref:`vacf<cli.vacf>`
- :ref:`green_kubo<cli.green_kubo>`
- :ref:`vibrations<cli.vibrations>`

RDF input files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Basic RDF calculations only need a trajectory, selections, bin settings,
and an output file. A restart file is not required for this case:

.. code-block:: text

    reference_selection = H
    target_selection = O
    delta_r = 0.05
    out_file = rdf.out
    traj_files = trajectory.xyz

Restart files and moldescriptor files are only needed when the calculation
requires molecular topology information. For example,
:code:`no_intra_molecular = True` excludes pairs from the same molecule.
If the files are not given explicitly, PQAnalysis tries to infer
:code:`trajectory.rst` from :code:`trajectory.xyz` and
:code:`moldescriptor.dat` from the trajectory directory:

.. code-block:: text

    reference_selection = H
    target_selection = O
    delta_r = 0.05
    out_file = rdf_inter.out
    traj_files = trajectory.xyz
    no_intra_molecular = True

Explicit :code:`restart_file` and :code:`moldescriptor_file` values are used
as-is. If both files are given and :code:`no_intra_molecular` is omitted,
:code:`no_intra_molecular` defaults to :code:`True`. If
:code:`no_intra_molecular` is set to :code:`False`, intra molecular pairs are
included. Inferred and defaulted values are written to the normal PQAnalysis
log output.

ADF input files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Angular distribution function analyses histogram the ``j-i-k`` angle at
a center atom ``i`` spanned by two ligand atoms ``j`` and ``k``. Only a
trajectory, a reference (center) selection, a target (ligand-1)
selection and an output file are required:

.. code-block:: text

    reference_selection = O
    target_selection = H
    n_angle_bins = 180
    out_file = adf.out
    traj_files = trajectory.xyz

A second ligand set can be given with ``target_selection_2`` (it
defaults to ``target_selection``). ``n_angle_bins`` and ``delta_angle``
are mutually exclusive ways of setting up the fixed 0 to 180 degree
angle range. The optional radial gates ``r_min_1``/``r_max_1`` and
``r_min_2``/``r_max_2`` restrict the ``i-j`` and ``i-k`` distances of
the counted triplets:

.. code-block:: text

    reference_selection = O
    target_selection = H
    target_selection_2 = H
    delta_angle = 1.0
    r_min_1 = 0.8
    r_max_1 = 1.2
    r_min_2 = 0.8
    r_max_2 = 1.2
    out_file = hoh_angle.out
    traj_files = trajectory.xyz

The output file contains the bin-center angle in degrees, the
normalized ADF (a probability density whose integral over the angle
range is one), the raw angle counts and the sine-corrected ADF (the
plain ADF divided by ``sin(theta)``, again normalized). Ligand pairs
are counted as ordered pairs, matching the legacy ``thh_tools`` ADF
tool.

Vibrational analysis input files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Vibrational analyses use a structure file and a Cartesian Hessian matrix. The Hessian can be generated by a PQ ``mm-hessian`` run.

.. code-block:: text

    structure_file = structure.rst
    hessian_file = hessian.dat
    moldescriptor_file = moldescriptor.dat
    out_file = wavenumbers.dat
    normal_modes_file = normal_modes.dat
    modes_prefix = mode
    modes_file = modes.xyz
    modes = positive
    modes_frames = 30
    modes_amplitude = 0.25
    modes_threshold = 1.0e-6
    unit = kcal
    hessian_sign = auto

The ``moldescriptor_file`` key is optional, but IR intensities require partial charges. ``unit`` accepts ``kcal``, ``hartree`` and ``ev``. ``hessian_sign = auto`` lets PQAnalysis choose the sign convention that gives the larger number of non-negative vibrational modes.

Mode visualization is optional. ``modes_prefix`` writes one sinusoidal multi-frame XYZ animation per selected mode, for example ``mode-6.xyz``. ``modes_file`` writes one extended XYZ file with mode vectors and metadata, similar to ASE/Jmol vibration output. ``modes`` accepts ``all``, ``nonzero``, ``positive``, one mode number, a list of mode numbers or a range. Explicit mode numbers are one-based. ``modes_frames`` controls animation frames, ``modes_amplitude`` controls fixed-amplitude displacement in Angstrom, and ``modes_threshold`` filters named mode selections in ``cm-1``. ``modes_temperature`` can be used instead for ASE-style energy-scaled animations.

MSD input files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Mean square displacement analyses compute the multiple-time-origin MSD of a
selected atom set with periodic-image unwrapping. If ``time_step`` (in ps) is
given, the self-diffusion coefficient is obtained from an Einstein-relation
fit over the trailing ``fit_window`` points and reported in the log output in
m\ :sup:`2`/s:

.. code-block:: text

    traj_files = trajectory.xyz
    target_selection = O
    out_file = msd.dat
    window = 1000
    gap = 10
    time_step = 0.001
    fit_window = 200

The output file contains the frame lag and the per-axis MSD in Angstrom
squared, matching the format of the legacy Diffcalc tool. ``window`` must be
divisible by ``gap``.

VACF input files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Velocity autocorrelation analyses read a velocity trajectory (``.vel``) and
compute the normalized VACF; with ``spectrum_file`` set, the windowed cosine
transform yields a vibrational power spectrum in cm\ :sup:`-1`:

.. code-block:: text

    traj_files = trajectory.vel
    target_selection = all
    out_file = vacf.dat
    time_step = 0.001
    window = 2500
    gap = 5
    spectrum_file = spectrum.dat
    ftsize = 5000
    window_function = exponential
    window_param = 4.0
    window_start = 0.0
    window_stop = 1.0

Setting ``charge_file`` (static charges) or ``charge_files`` (a charge
trajectory read in lockstep) switches to the charge-flux autocorrelation
q\ :sub:`i`\ v\ :sub:`i`, whose spectrum approximates an infrared spectrum.
``window_function`` accepts ``exponential``, ``hann`` and ``blackman``;
``method = fft`` selects a faster dense-origin estimator instead of the
legacy-exact sliding-origin one.

Green-Kubo input files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Green-Kubo analyses read a velocity trajectory (``.vel``, velocities in
Angstrom/s) and obtain the self-diffusion coefficient from the time
integral of the un-normalized velocity autocorrelation function
D = (1/3) :math:`\\int_0^\\infty` C\ :sub:`vv`\ (t) dt:

.. code-block:: text

    traj_files = trajectory.vel
    target_selection = all
    out_file = green_kubo.dat
    time_step = 0.001
    window = 1000
    method = fft
    fit_start = 0.5
    fit_stop = 1.0

The output file contains one row per lag with the columns lag time in ps,
the un-normalized autocorrelation C\ :sub:`vv` in (Angstrom/s)\ :sup:`2`
and the running diffusion coefficient D\ :sub:`running` in m\ :sup:`2`/s,
so that the plateau can be inspected directly. The plateau diffusion
coefficient is estimated as the mean of D\ :sub:`running` over the
trailing fit window ``[fit_start, fit_stop]`` (fractions of the
correlation window), reported with its standard deviation in
m\ :sup:`2`/s and cm\ :sup:`2`/s in the log output. This reproduces the
Einstein-MSD self-diffusion coefficient of the same trajectory. ``method``
accepts ``fft`` (default, Wiener-Khinchin) and ``direct`` (sliding time
origins); ``coefficient`` currently only accepts ``diffusion``.

Pure command line tools
-----------------------

- :ref:`build_spectrum<cli.build_spectrum>`
- :ref:`check_momentum<cli.check_momentum>`
- :ref:`continue_input<cli.continue_input>`
- :ref:`rst2xyz<cli.rst2xyz>`
- :ref:`traj2extxyz<cli.traj2extxyz>`
- :ref:`traj2qmcfc<cli.traj2qmcfc>`
- :ref:`traj2box<cli.traj2box>`

Note that :ref:`check_momentum<cli.check_momentum>` parses velocities in
single precision: reported momentum norms below roughly 1e-7 times the
scaled sum of m\ :sub:`i` \|v\ :sub:`i`\| are parsing noise rather than
physical center of mass drift (the legacy ``equipartition.jl`` tool parses
in double precision and resolves smaller drift).
